---
author: Jackson Andress
title: "Framing Essay - Venice: A Silk Roads City"
layout: base
header-image: images/ota-gate-khiva2.jpg
thumbnail: images/ota-gate-demo-brown.png
summary: The splendor of Venice was derived from their adoption of Silk Roads industries
---

# Venice: A Silk Roads City

The Republic of Venice in the Middle Ages was known for many things. Its dizzying networks of canals accompanied by hundreds of bridges, its beautiful works of art and architecture, its republican form of government, and strong navy made the city stand out from most others in Medieval Europe and the world at large. However, Venice was and continues to be most remembered for its global trade networks that brought the city wealth and valuable commodities from all over the world and allowed the Venetians to upkeep their canals, build bridges and grand works of arhcitecture, sponsor brilliant works of art, and construct such an enormous naval fleet. The splendor of Venice came from its being a Silk Roads city and figures such as Marco Polo are still remembered today as being emblematic of this Silk Roads connectivity. However, it was not just wealth and trade goods that came to Venice from places eastward such as China, Central Asia, Syria, and Egypt, but entire industries that came to Venice and in turn came to define the Venetian economy. In this essay, I will discuss how the industries of glassmaking, silk manufacturing, papermaking, and the incense trade shaped Venice’s history as it capitalized on the European demand for Eastern goods by producing them themselves.
	
Beginning with the Venetian glass industry, it should be noted that glassmaking had been a staple industry in the Italian Peninsula since at least the classical period as archaeological evidence shows that the Roman Empire traded their glasswares as far East as the Han Dynasty of China. However, in the High Middle Ages (c. 1050-1300), the Fatimid and, later, Mamluk Sultanates of Egypt and Syria came to dominate the Mediterranean glass trade as they pioneered new techniques and styles for making and decorating glasswares. As these glasswares became the most popular, Venetian glassmakers, often associated with island of Murano since their being moved to that island in 1291, imitated Muslim glass styles well into the 16th century though with their own unique artistic interventions. Venetian glasswares thus became extremely popular with European nobles and wealthy merchants because they were seen as being of very high quality but were less expensive than glasswares of similar quality shipped from Egypt and Syria. Today, Venice’s glass industry, still operating out of the island of Murano, continues to be one of the leading industries for the floating city. So though glassmaking was always an Italian enterprise, Venice’s glassmaking industry benefitted greatly from the techniques and styles it borrowed from the East.
	
Venetian silks were also highly prized in Europe for much the reason as their glasswares. Rather than paying exorbitant prices for fine silks made in China, consumers could buy cheaper silks produced in Venice, though the quality was not on par with Chinese silks. The silk industry arrived in Venice from Southern Italy, where the silk industry had been established by the Muslim emirates that controlled the region until they were ousted by the Normans. From there, the silk industry made its way to Tuscany as the town of Lucca became a major producer of silks in the 11th and 12th centuries. However, in 1317, several hundered Luccans, many of whom were silkmakers, were exiled from the city. Around 300 of them made their way to Venice where the Luccan silkmakers became integral to the growth and development of the Venetian silk industry. Over the next two hundred years, Venice, alongside other Italian city-states like Genoa and Florence, became powerhouses for European silk production. By 1517, silks were the most highly traded textile in all of Venice, making it one the most important and profitable industries in the entire Republic. As such, Venice was not just a Silk Roads city but a city of silk itself.
	
Late Medieval and Early Modern Venice was also a powerhouse for the nascent industry of printing. With its first printing press opening in 1468, it took only about twenty years before Venice came to dominate the printing industry as the presses of Aldus Manutius churned out hundreds of highly desired editions of classical and humanist texts. Though the printing press itself was a German invention, the technique of woodblock printing was first developed in Song Dynasty China. Further, Venice’s printing industry required massive quantities of paper, a technology also first developed in China. However, Venice did not acquire all of this paper from trade with China or elsewhere. Rather, they developed their own papermaking industry in the nearby area surrounding Lake Garda in the Veneto region. The Lake Garda papermaking industry was extremely important to the growth of Venice’s printing and publishing industries as they were able to cut costs by producing paper within their own borders rather than by acquiring it through trade. Further, the largest printing houses were able to establish de facto vertical monopolies over the printing industy through marriage alliances with Lake Garda’s papermaking families. It is through these processes of industry and politics that lead to Venice’s domination of the printing industry in the late-15th and early-16th centuries.
	
Finally, the incense trade in Venice was another Silk Roads industry that came to define Venice’s development. Though Venice was not a manufacturer of incense itself, its citizens, particularly the patrician class, consumed large quantities of incense as goodd-smelling scents became an integral facet of Venetian private sacred space. Indeed, the homes of the Venetian elite would have smelled immaculate as they burned incense to add to the sensory experience of their daily devotional practices. Further, the widespread consumption of incense in Venice led to the development and growth of Venice’s brass industry in the 14th and 15th centuries as brass incense burners became highly sought after. Similarly to Murano glass, these brass incense burners often mimicked Islamic styles produced in Mamluk Syria and Egypt. The incense itself also came from the Islamic world as the Mamluks, Arabs, Ilkhans, and Ottomans were world-renowned for the high quality of their incenses. Venice profited greatly from their trading with these cultures as they sold the Muslim-made incenses in their own city and to other European powers.
	
Indeed, Venice profited greatly from their engagement in Silk Roads trade writ large. Not only did they forge lasting trade relations with cultures in the East that allowed them to act as brokers for high-demand commodities throughout Europe, they also engaged in the production of these commodities to even greater effect. Venice serves as an example of how industries traveled along the Silk Roads as much as individual commodities. Furthermore, the dominance of Venice in the Mediterranean throuhgout the Middle Ages can be more easily explained when one understands how the Venetians seized their portion of the marketshare for Eastern goods by producing them themselves.

---

## Bibliography

- Lastname, Firstname. “Title of the Article.” *Title of the Journal* 9, no. 9 (1999): 999–999.
- Lastname, Firstname. *Title of the Book*. Publisher Press, 1999.
